---
title: "X‐ray micro‐computed tomography in the assessment of penile cavernous fibrosis in a rabbit castration model"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-07-08-paper-4
excerpt: 'The study evaluates the use of micro-computed tomography in assessing penile cavernous fibrosis in animal models, comparing it with other methods like histological, histochemical, and immunohistochemical analysis. The experiment involved 25 New Zealand male rabbits with induced testosterone deficiency. The study found that micro-computed tomography provided a 3D visualization of the entire corpora cavernosa and could track fibrosis progression through gray value analysis. However, it was found that RT-PCR could not be conducted on samples studied by micro-CT due to RNA destruction. The study suggests that micro-CT could potentially affect the immunohistochemical outcome, as an increase in TGF-beta-1 expression was observed later than histological signs of fibrosis.'
date: 2021-07-08
venue: 'Andrology'
paperurl: 'http://iliapopov17.github.io/files/X-ray micro-computed tomography in the assessment of penile cavernous fibrosis in a rabbit castration model.pdf'
citation: 'Kogan, M.I.; Popov, I.V.; Kirichenko, E.Y.; Mitrin, B.I.; Sadyrin, E.V.; Kulaeva, E.D.; <b>Popov, I.V.</b>; Kulba, S.N.; Logvinov, A.K.; Akimenko, M.A.; et al. X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography in the Assessment of Penile Cavernous Fibrosis in a Rabbit Castration Model. <i>Andrology</i> 2021, 9, 1467–1480, doi:10.1111/andr.13077.'
---

Background
Current assessment methods of penile cavernous fibrosis in animal models have limitations due to the inability to provide complex and volume analysis of fibrotic alterations.

Objective
The aim was to evaluate micro-computed tomography for assessment of cavernous fibrosis and compare it with histological, histochemical, immunohistochemical, and RT-PCR analysis.

Materials and methods
A controlled trial was performed involving 25 New Zealand male rabbits with induced testosterone deficiency by orchidectomy. Penile samples were obtained before and after 7, 14, 21, and 84 days from orchidectomy. We consistently performed (a) gray value analysis of corpora cavernosa 3D models reconstructed after micro-computed tomography, (b) morphometry of smooth muscles/connective tissue ratio, collagen type I/III ratio, and area of TGF-beta-1 expression in corpora cavernosa, and (c) RT-PCR of TGF-beta-1 expression.

Results
Micro-computed tomography allowed visualization of penile structures at a resolution comparable to light microscopy. Gray values of corpora cavernosa decreased from 1673 (1512–1773) on the initial day to 1184 (1089–1232) on the 21st day (p < 0.005). However, on the 84th day, it increased to 1610 (1551–1768). On 21st and 84th days, there was observed a significant decrease in smooth muscle/connective tissue ratio and a significant increase in collagen type I/III ratio (p < 0.05). TGF-beta1 expression increased on the 84th day according to immunohistochemistry (p < 0.005). RT-PCR was impossible to conduct due to the absence of RNA in obtained samples after micro-CT.

Discussion and conclusions
Micro-computed tomography provided 3D visualization of entire corpora cavernosa and assessment of radiodensity alterations by gray value analysis in fibrosis progression. We speculate that gray value changes at early and late fibrosis stages could be related to tissue reorganization. RT-PCR is impossible to conduct on tissue samples studied by micro-CT due to RNA destruction. We also suggest that micro-computed tomography could negatively affect the immunohistochemical outcome, as a significant increase of TGF-beta-1 expression occurs later than histological fibrotic signs.
