---
title: "Coronaviruses of synantropic bats: an unexplored threat"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-12-14-paper-6
excerpt: 'The text discusses the zoonotic origin of over 60% of human viral pathogens, with bats being reservoirs for various viruses, including coronaviruses. It highlights three major outbreaks since the 2000s: SARS in 2002, MERS in 2012, and COVID-19 in 2019. These outbreaks are believed to be linked to evolutionary processes driven by environmental and genetic factors. The text suggests that SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19, originated from a bat of the genus Rhinolophus and is now transmitted globally through human-to-human contact. Various animal species are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2, but natural infections have only been reported in certain animals, including domestic dogs and cats, zoo animals, and farm-raised mink and ferrets. Notably, animal-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has only been reported from mink to humans on mink farms.'
date: 2022-12-14
venue: 'E3S Web of Conferences'
paperurl: 'http://iliapopov17.github.io/files/Coronaviruses of synantropic bats an unexplored threat.pdf'
citation: 'Lipilkina, T.; <b>Popov, I.</b>; Kitsenko, K.; Popov, I.; Ermakov, A. Coronaviruses of Synantropic Bats: An Unexplored Threat. <i>E3S Web Conf.</i> 2022, 363, 04018, doi:10.1051/e3sconf/202236304018.'
'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---

More than 60% of human viral pathogens are of zoonotic origin, resulting from accidental or frequent animal infections. Bats are reservoirs of various viruses, pathogens in humans of varying severity from mild asymptomatic forms to severe lethal outcomes. And are associated with the spread of various viruses (Marburg virus, Ebola virus) and, above all, coronaviruses. Since the 2000s, three independent outbreaks of coronaviruses with the emergence of new zooanthroponotic human coronaviruses (Betacoronavirus) with epidemic and pandemic potential have been registered. The first outbreak was reported in 2002 (SARS), caused by SARS-CoV, in the PRC (Guangdong Province). The second outbreak occurred in 2012 (MERS, MERS), associated with MERS-CoV, Saudi Arabia. The third occurred in 2019 PRC (Hubei Province), this case evolved into a COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2. These cases seem to be independent, but the literature reports that the emergence of all these viruses is related to evolutionary processes driven by environmental and genetic aspects. It is assumed that the coronavirus causative agent of severe acute respiratory syndrome-2 (SARS-CoV-2) originated from a coronavirus-infected bat of the genus Rhinolophus. After initial emergence, due to the host vector. SARS-CoV-2 is now transmitted worldwide through human-to-human transmission. Data from experimental studies show that animal species such as cats, ferrets, raccoon dogs, Javanese macaques, rhesus macaques, white-tailed deer, rabbits, Egyptian fruit bats and Syrian hamsters are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, natural SARS-CoV-2 infections have only been reported in domestic dogs and cats, tigers, lions, snow leopards, cougars and gorillas in zoos, and farm-raised mink and ferrets. Although human-to-animal transmission has been reported in several cases, animal-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been reported only from mink to humans on mink farms.
